
Assignment 2
Goal

The goal is the second assignment is to familiarize students with the use of cryptographic libraries. This is an assignment for individuals - no group work or collaboration allowed. Violations of the UF Honor code will be reported to the Office of Student Integrity immediately, and students will fail the course.
Description

Due: September 17, 2014, via Canvas by 5:00pm EDT.
Points: 80

In this homework you will create file encryption/decryption/transmission suite akin to scp using gcrypt libraries provided by the Linux operating system. Details of this assignment are given below.

    The programs are to be written in 'C' and use the libgcrypt library. The make utility must be used to create the program.
    The file encryption programs gatorcrypt and gatordec should take the following inputs:

    gatorcrypt <input file> [-d < IP-addr:port >][-l]

    gatordec <filename>  [-d < port >][-l] 
    	    

    where gatorcrypt takes an input file and transmits it to the IP address/port specified on the command-line (-d option), or dumps the encrypted contents of the input file to an output file of the same name, but with the added extension `` .uf'' e.g., if the input file is hello.txt, the output file should hello.txt.uf. Note that the gatordec should run as a network daemon (-d), awaiting incoming network connections on the command-line specified network port. When a connection comes in, it writes the file data to "filename" and exits. gatordec can also be run in local mode (-l) in which it bypasses the network functionality and simply decrypts a file specified as input. It is assumed that the input file (for decryption) ends ".uf", so the output will be the original filename without this additional extension. (This is simply the inverse of gatorcrypt).
    On each invocation, gatorcrypt and gatordec should prompt the user for a password. This password will be used to securely generate an encryption using PBKDF2 (Password Based Key Derivation Function 2). When running PBKDF2, use SHA-512 with 4096 iterations and the string "NaCl" as the salt. libgcrypt implements PBKDF2, so use their implementation. After generation, for grading the key should be printed as a hexadecimal number as in the example execution below.
    Encryption must be done using AES128 in Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) Mode. Be sure to initialize the IV of each invocation to 5844 (the integer, not the ASCII character).
    In addition to encryption, gatorcrypt and gatordec should use an HMAC for authentication. On encryption, the HMAC should be appended to the output, and on decryption it should be removed before writing the output. gatordec should give an error and exit (with exit code 62) if the input HMAC is not correct. Use SHA-512 as the hash function, and HMAC the encrypted data. Libgcrypt provides SHA-512 and provides a flag to use it in HMAC mode. Use the same key as encryption (for simplicity).
    Both gatorcrypt and gatordec should display an error and abort the operation if the output file already exists. main() should return 33 when this happens.
    To turn in: you will create a tar file named < lastname >-assign2.tgz which contains a single directory < lastname >-assign2 which contains the Makefile and all of your source code for the program. All source code and the makefile should be extensively commented. I should be able to run the following commands (after retrieving the file from Canvas):

    	    tar xvfz < lastname >-assign2.tgz
    	    cd < lastname >-assign2
    	    make
    	    cp gatorcrypt testfile.check
    	    ./gatorcrypt testfile.check -l
    	    rm testfile.check
                ./gatordec testfile.check.uf -l
                diff testfile.check gatorcrypt
    	    

    Warning: If I cannot do these minimal operations successfully, you will not receive a passing grade. This is not all I will test---I have another battery of tests I will do when grading including carefully reviewing your code. While developing on any *nix system is fine, your code must run correctly on Linux. I recommend testing on the thunder machine before submission. 

Note: Like all assignments in this class you are prohibited from copying any content from the Internet or sharing ideas, code, configuration, text or anything else or getting help from anyone in or outside of the class. Consulting online sources is acceptable, but under no circumstances should anything be copied. Failure to abide by this requirement will result in immediate reporting to the Office of Student Integrity.

An example session using these tools might look like (this is not actual output):

	octave% ./gatorcrypt testfile -d 192.168.1.48:8888
	Password: hello
	Key: FA 3A 2F D3 7E CB 27 F2 B3 42 35 06 CF B1 ED 0E 
	Successfully encrypted testfile to testfile.uf (6512 bytes written).
	Transmitting to 192.168.1.42:8888
        Successfully received

	-----

	nittany% ./gatordec testfile -d 8888
	Waiting for connections.   
	Inbound file. 
	Password: hello
	Key: FA 3A 2F D3 7E CB 27 F2 B3 42 35 06 CF B1 ED 0E 
	Successfully received and decrypted testfile (6400 bytes written).
	nittany% 
	

Submission Instructions

Students must turn in their tar file to Canvas by 5:00pm on September 17, 2014. Students must then set up a demo period with the TA.
A note about this assignment

The purpose of this assignment is to introduce familiarity to using cryptographic libraries in a somewhat realistic exercise. Because familiarity is the goal, certain steps have been simplified at the cost of security. One example of weakness is the fact that the PBKDF2 salt is not a random string. Another is that the IV is specified to always start at 5844. This is insecure if the password is ever reused to encrypt a different file. Yet another is using the same key for encryption and authentication -- this is not a recommended practice because the compromise of one mechanism means that the other automatically fails. Making these specific changes would in fact make your application robust in practice. 
